so your body
responds to every single thought
you have
and your brain responds and are they
helping you or are they hurting you and
you can learn to
change your
body
often by changing where you let your
mind go
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr daniel amen known as
america's most popular psychiatrist he's
double board certified and has a slew of
new york times best-selling books to his
name he scanned over 100 000 brains in
his career and his research into brain
imaging ranked number 19 out of 100
science stories in 2015. his incredible
public television programs on the brain
and brain health have aired more than 80
000 times and through his nationwide
string of health clinics his team sees
over 4 000 patients every
month this is a very serious list of
bonafides my friend and welcome back by
the way this is round two it is good to
have you back well i'm grateful to be
with you again
so with that insane string of
interactions with the brain how's that
giving you a new way to think about
mental health how should we reframe it
what what does that taught you so i have
a new book coming out called the end of
mental illness and i realize that that's
going to get me into all sorts of
trouble
i love it but
after looking at the brain
i've come to realize these are not
mental
illnesses at all
that their brain health issues that
steal your mind and when you really
unpack this one idea it just changes
everything people begin to see their
problems as medical and not moral it
decreases shame and guilt it increases
compliance it increases
compassion and forgiveness because we
begin to see bipolar disorder
schizophrenia or major depression like
heart disease and no one is shamed for
it even though all of them have
lifestyle contributions where do you
think that the stigma came from like why
because dude it was not long ago where
mental health issues was really
really stigmatized i would say it's less
now
i for years struggled with anxiety and
didn't even want to tell my wife because
i thought she would think less of me
where do you think that all comes from
i think it comes from the fact that we
don't think of these as brain health
challenges
mental illness places the emphasis on
your mind
which is vague and hard to define
the mind is created by the brain and
when your brain works right
you work right but when your brain is
troubled for whatever reason
you have trouble in your life you're
more likely to be anxious you're more
likely to be depressed you're more
likely to have cognitive problems or get
the diagnosis of
add
and
if we don't ever look at the brain
then how do we care about it
think about this
what other medical specialty
virtually never looks at the organ
they treat
and because
we don't look at the brain on a routine
basis like we look at your heart or your
prostate or your breast
nobody cares about their brain
really and and when when you don't look
at the brain you come up with all sorts
of interesting theories about why people
act the way they do but you don't have
any information
on the actual biology and so for someone
who struggles with anxiety what we
learned it's clearly not one thing your
brain could work too hard and that's why
you're anxious because you can't settle
it down or it doesn't work hard enough
so it can't suppress
the anxious feelings or maybe there's a
toxin or trauma
and
[Music]
most people with anxiety they go to a
therapist and they talk about what's
going on
and so they're
working really on the software of the
issue but what if there's a hardware
concern
i want to talk about the biology i think
this is really interesting and would i
think you would self-identify as
religious yes you go to church you talk
about church a lot um how do you think
about sort of religion and that
one-to-one tie between the the
physicality of the brain and the mind
there doesn't seem to be a conflict for
you where there is for a lot of people
yeah no not at all for me to think all
of this evolved
out of random chance i think actually
takes more faith
than believing in creative design i've
actually studied
prayer and the impact of prayer on the
brains really interesting tell me more
go deep what do you mean by that what is
the impact
so
we studied it in different states so
conversation states like different brain
wave states or different like well we
studied the brain in different prayer
states okay so for example i pray for
you
it's very intentional very purposeful
versus someone who does prophecy which
is one of the gifts in both the new
testament and the old testament or
speaking in tongues which is a gift in
the book of acts in the new testament
it's really interesting because speaking
in tongues is basically you are
channeling
the holy spirit and i've actually
scanned channelers i mean people who
channel the dead like the long island
medium and other people and there's
research on channelers because you know
in the united states we go no that's not
real but in places like brazil
half the population believes in it and
engages in those kinds of spiritual
disciplines
and so the theory
was when you speak in tongues or when
you channel you have to drop the
function
in your brain so you have to sort of
drop the noise in your brain to become a
vessel
for the channel
so give me give me some of the brain
waves so full disclosure i'm not
religious at all and i definitely will
count myself in sort of the deeply
skeptical but i accept that there are
things i do not understand but could you
look at a brain scan and know ah this
person's in a prayer state or a
meditative state like are there certain
things that you look for well you have
to compare it
so for example for the prayer study we
did both spect which looks at blood flow
and activity and we also did
quantitative eeg which looks at the
electrical activity in the brain so if
you think of
alpha states or
theta states theta states being more
meditative state although meditation
fooled us you sort of think oh if when
you meditate
your brain would get less activity
that's true in your emotional brain but
in your thoughtful brain it fires up it
actually increases something called
gamma rays which are
super fast
waves and so you have to sort of know
where in the brain you're looking
so when we we say brain waves what we're
looking at is how
busy is your brain and we measure it in
something called waves per
second or cycles per
second and 0 to two cycles per second is
called delta waves and it's what happens
when we sleep
um three to seven or theta waves sort of
daydreaming people have add have higher
levels of theta waves so they're often
in sort of a daydreaming
state
alpha waves 8 to 12 cycles per second
and
that
people often train that
to become in a more
meditative
focused state so i love hypnosis and
i've done it ever since i was a medical
student with my patients and
so we almost think we try to get them
into an alpha state and then beta
is 13 to 18 and high beta is above 18
and gamma is above 40. and so
we can actually train
your brain
maybe you need less theta so you can
concentrate better not be so distracted
or
maybe we need to train up alpha and it's
very exciting for me because
i first learned this idea in medical
school first do no harm
use the least toxic most effective
treatment so i'd much rather do
something like nerve feedback
for you
than just start you willy-nilly on
medication but unfortunately that's
what's happening in our society 85
percent of psychiatric drugs are
prescribed by non-psychiatric physicians
and 10-minute office visits and and i'm
not opposed to them
i use them when nothing else is working
but it's not the first thing
i think about and in the end of mental
illness there's a whole chapter on mind
medication versus nutraceuticals
and there's actually a table on which
supplements have a level scientific
evidence for things like insomnia
anxiety depression adhd addiction
and and i'm pretty excited
about that all right let's go back to
the neurofeedback and meditation prayer
like how do we
train ourselves to be in a different
state so i do a lot of creative writing
and there's just a certain state that i
think is an alpha wave state but reading
your breakdown in the books it may be
more of a theta state
so i'll meditate for 15 to 20 minutes i
am focused entirely on
diaphragmatic breathing so
um i am trying to what i think of is
lower the background radiation so all of
my stress all of my anxiety i can get it
to zero and unless there's something
really weird going on in my life i can
get it to zero pretty fast like i said
15 to 20 minutes start diaphragm
breathing sort of all the worries and
thoughts begin to go away
but you've got this neurofeedback that
people are using you referred to it as a
game on a computer what are people doing
how are they getting the neural feedback
do you need that can you get there
through prayer meditation like how do we
begin to shift gears well one of the
reasons i really like nerve feedback
is when people meditate
the only feedback they're getting is
from themselves and so when you have
instruments that can actually measure it
you have a better sense
and then once we
know it and we have our goal whatever
that goal is more creativity more focus
less anxiety irritability
then we can specifically set those
training protocols
and give you feedback to know where
you are
and that's actually how i came to
imaging was through
a treatment technique called biofeedback
so biofeedback we measure things like
hand temperature heart rate
sweat gland activity muscle tension
breathing brain waves and so we know
your baseline and then we teach you so
for example to warm your hands and if i
teach you to warm your hands with your
brain
it's an automatic relaxation
response and so it triggers something
called a parasympathetic
response so if you think of fight or
flight is this sympathetic response well
it's the opposite
of that and so well how do you teach
someone to warm their hands so
first you put a little thermistor on
their pinky and go so what's your hand
temperature
and then
let's get hand warming images and let's
see which one works for you and so we'll
write down
10 images that you might think would
work for you and then we'll spend a
couple of minutes on each image and then
you know over an hour you have a pretty
good sense one if you can do it children
do it without any problem because they
don't believe they can't
that is super interesting but um so it
could be
holding a puppy
or putting your hands in front of a fire
or holding a cup of
decaf coffee or and this starts warming
people's hands up yeah and when you warm
your hand it sends a signal to the rest
of your body
to calm down because when you get
stressed your hands get cold
and they get sweaty so when i was a
young psychiatrist i used to do a word
association test with my patients and i
would talk about
well think of a pencil and nothing would
happen with their hand temperature
i think of your mother and for me when i
think of my mother my hands get warmer
because she's this really good concept
in my head but as soon as you go think
of your father my hands get cold
because we had a conflicted
relationship i mean he's actually one of
my best friends now
but it took a long time to get there
so your body
responds to every single thought
you have
and your brain responds
and are they helping you or are they
hurting you and you can learn to
change your
body
often by changing where you let your
mind go
i want to go back to hypnotism so is
there an element of that in this uh and
i think the first question we have to
answer is why is hypnosism powerful
well it helps you tap into a natural
state are you are you um shutting a part
of your brain down no actually we're
activating so that was like like with
meditation you know it sort of fooled us
yes it calms your emotional brain but it
activates your cortical brain the most
evolved human thoughtful part of the
brain
hypnosis in the studies that have done
tends to activate the happy side of the
brain which is the left front and people
who are right-handed and we're not
talking about las vegas and making
people cluck like chickens and all of
that we are in hypnotic states all the
time so i drove to vegas and that five
hour drive seemed like it went by in two
it's called highway hypnosis where time
gets distorted i don't know if you ever
like drove through a city and you're
like i don't remember driving through
the city
but you did and you were obviously fully
awake and competent and so on it's a
hypnotic state
so i'm just directing people into a
natural state because they're more
open not more gullible because you can't
make people do things they wouldn't do
but i have found it helpful for sleep
it's helpful for pain it's helpful for
anxiety and it just feels so
good which is i think because i had a
lot of anxiety when i was young i think
i gravitated toward these things because
i teach my patients because they also
help me
yeah so the idea of hypnosis making you
open what made me think of that is you
were saying okay you can give people
these images they can actually begin to
warm their hands
uh it made me wonder if okay do we first
have to train them to
light up that part of the brain that
you're calling the happy part which i've
never heard that reference before um so
is is that step one teach them to light
up the the part of their brain that
makes them more receptive so some people
are highly hypnotizable
[Music]
that when you put them in a trance
time gets distorted very quickly and
almost everybody can be hypnotized but
for
some people like me it's training you
need to do it not one time and think of
it as magic but do it over time and when
you put yourself when you do the
diaphragmatic breathing which i'm a huge
fan
of you're actually beginning to put
yourself in a hypnotic meditative state
and then you can solve problems
it just your whole physiology
changes do you practice like do you
teach people how to do self-hypnosis so
if if a meditative state is hypnotic
then i would say okay it's simply
focusing on the breath returning sort of
letting go of the thoughts coming back
to the breath over and over and over um
is that sort of the baseline entry into
this state or are there
more typical things that you'll have
somebody do like trying to warm their
hands like what's the easiest gateway to
this and then how do people use it
so we have an
online program called bren fitlife and
there's actually six hypnosis audios i
do for them as if they were in my office
um so we begin to decrease the outside
world by focusing
and then i'll have people focus on
something above their eye level and as i
count to 20 i'm going to suggest to them
their eyes are getting heavy and about
12 their eyes start to get heavy and
i'll have them close their eyes so we
take
their scattered attention to a spot
close their eyes and then the attention
gets focused inward okay
what's happening in the brain what are
you trying to do in that first step
what i'm trying to do is decrease the
noise
and then
i'm going to
do
diaphragmatic breathing for them or
really initially deep breathing if i
hadn't already taught them diaphragmatic
breathing and there's a specific rate i
don't know if you've ever played with
this but three seconds in
six seconds out because that rate has
been found to trigger a parasympathetic
response but i'm just getting them
focused on what's going on internally
and then i'll have them roll their
eyeballs up i'll have them basically
tense their muscles around their eyes
roll it down and then we're going to do
progressive relaxation
i'll have them imagine the relaxation
spreading from the little tiny muscles
in their eyes to their forehead to their
scalp all the way down to the bottom of
their feet and then i'll do a deepening
technique may have them walk down a
flight of stairs
or
something similar to that and then we'll
do guided imagery i'll take them
part the beach the mountains you know
whatever we decide on ahead of time that
is relaxing for them get them to see
what's there feel what's there smell
taste the freshness in the air and and
then we do the work
i had a 16 year old boy who had panic
attacks
and
i got him into a really nice calm
hypnotic state
and then i had him remember the last
time he had a panic attack that's
interesting why there exposure in a new
safe so one we're relaxed
it's safe
and then in this safe meditative state i
would have had i want to you to imagine
yourself getting younger and smaller
smaller and younger
and i want you to go to the first time
you had a panic attack
and after
a minute he went back to when he was
four years old he had to stay
stuck in his throat he thought he was
gonna die
and
someone did a heimlich maneuver on him
and it was very traumatic for him and
he'd completely forgotten about it and
then and this doesn't happen often his
mother was in the room his 16 year old
boy and
i'm like well is there anything before
this
because that was one of the sensitizing
events he actually went back to a time
when he couldn't see when it was dark
when he was wet and something was
choking him
and his mother knew exactly what
happened he actually went back to his
birth and was born with the cord wrapped
around his neck
do you think that that he's remembering
a story because doesn't the brain or
reorganize so much that that those
memories just they're not actually there
anymore
see i actually think we carry
memories from other people
so genetically in the book you talk
about how you can train a mouse to be
afraid of a cherry blossom tree for
three generations which is crazy is that
what you mean or are you talking about
something else yeah my grandfather for
example
when he was 19 he came from the middle
east came to los angeles his brother who
was a bad driver borrowed his sister's
car
and was killed in a train accident
and he's 19. my grandfather never drove
because that anxiety got solidified
in his brain
and that happened before he was involved
in making my father and so the anxiety i
carry
may not just be mine that it may
actually come from the experiences
of generations that i think a lot of it
didn't start with me
um
and so we know for example
children of holocaust survivors have a
higher incidence of ptsd
30 percent of children of soldiers from
iraq and afghanistan who had ptsd 30
percent of their children had ptsd
they call it secondary
ptsd and so i think of these as
ancestral
dragons it's like what's the issue that
actually may not be your issue and so i
think it's really important for you to
know about your mom
and your grandma and your grandfather on
her side and your dad and their
ancestors because
it's not just the jeans we inherit it's
the scratches on them that turn on or
off those genes that make anxiety
depression
much more common in future generations
so for example the end of mental illness
is dedicated to my two nieces amelie and
alize they're 10 and 15
and
they have
mental illness throughout their whole
family
family history of suicides multiple
suicides anxiety depression bipolar
disorder addiction borderline
personality criminal behavior
but genes only load the gun it's what
happens to us that pulls the trigger and
unfortunately they were raised in chaos
with
parents who suffered with depression
addiction domestic violence they had
multiple moves
and so the whole idea behind the end of
mental illness is how do i end it in
these girls
and in their babies and grandbabies and
what you do is you put their bodies and
their brain in a healing environment so
we work on the actual physical
functioning of their bodies and
alize when i scanned her at 13 her brain
looked terrible
and was that because her mom drank when
she was pregnant was it because they
lived in a mold-filled home
what i don't know but repairing that is
absolutely essential
to her doing well in school for her
picking a good partner for her
and not continuing what are the the sort
of baseline things we do you talk about
diet in the book
not being addicted to flaming cheetos
anymore what are
what are some of the the things that you
did to help them out
so for alize i mean first it starts with
feeding them right
and then supplementation multiple
vitamin
fish oil
optimize her vitamin d level
product gave her a brain boost that has
seven different things to optimize brain
function
put her in a hyperbaric chamber that
made a big difference for her
hyperbaric oxygen is
really intriguing for people that don't
know what it is walk them through what
it does and why it's useful
so i've published a number of studies on
it and probably have a thousand patients
with scans before and after and the
reason it's like why do i care i'm a
psychiatrist why do i want to put you in
hyperbaric chamber that puts you under
pressure with increased oxygen because
it increases blood flow to the brain
well for alzay she had low blood flow
and so she
had about 40 dives so about 40 hours in
a hyperbaric chamber
i'm in a new
docu-series with justin bieber and the
hyperbaric chambers all over the
docu-series about him getting zipped in
and zipped out because when i scanned
him initially had really low blood flow
to his brain and he feels less anxious
because he has better blood flow
to his brain and so that was one of the
cornerstones for alas a
and then i teach her
anomaly the little one not to believe
every stupid thing they think this is
really
important so we talk about hardware and
software optimize the physical
functioning of your brain and you do it
by going after all the risk factors
blood flow being one of them but then as
you optimize the physical functioning
she's got a lot of bad programming
because she grew up in chaos and chaos
gives you sort of a hyperactive
emotional brain and
your brain automatically goes to the
dark place and so
every morning
we say today is going to be a great day
why because then your unconscious mind
will find well why is today going to be
a great day i get to hang out with you
so that makes me happy
at the end of the day
we always talk about what went well
today it's training your mind but also
setting up your dreams
to be more positive and if your dreams
are more positive you'll be in deeper
rem state which is a more healing state
for your dreams
that's so simple but really really
powerful this is something man as you're
talking it's like i know some of this
stuff and even that one like setting
that intention before i go to bed would
be better than what i'm doing now which
is just sort of tumbling into bed and
going to sleep and it's so cool because
you're probably like me and you're just
busy you have a lot to do and you want
to accomplish a lot and so my days just
go so fast
and when i close my eyes and go what
went well today i begin to remember
these phenomenal
touch points that i just sort of breezed
over
and
i
i love that and then i have a little
tiny habit
i worked with professor bj fogg for six
months on creating tiny habits for brain
health and the mother tiny habit is
before you do anything before you say
anything just ask yourself is this good
for my brain or bad for it and if i love
myself which i do i'm going to make
better decisions so is this good for my
brain or bad for it if you can answer
that question with information and love
your brain is going to be better yeah
it's one of those it's really simple and
not a lot of people do it
give me some more on the tiny habits you
pepper them throughout the book but uh
what are some other tiny habits that
either you use or you've got your nieces
using
um
so if the first one is just is this good
for my brain or not what are some others
whenever you feel sad
mad nervous or out of control write down
what you're thinking
and then ask yourself if it's true
and there's a whole process in the book
to not believe every stupid thing you
think
and then when you go to say something to
your wife
or
at work
does it fit
there's an exercise actually in all of
my books basically called the one page
miracle on one piece of paper write down
what you want
your relationships your work
your money
your physical emotional spiritual health
what do you want i think everything
starts with what do you want
and then
does your behavior get you what you want
so for example with my wife i want a
kind caring loving supportive passionate
relationship i always want that
i don't always feel like that sometimes
i'll get a rude thought in my head i'm
having a bad day or she didn't do she's
not great about closing cabinet doors
and um and i've come to believe
i would so much rather have her in this
house with the cabinet door open
than have her not there so i like let it
go because being
a jerk doesn't fit
the goal i have for my marriage
but it starts with telling your frontal
lobe so that's the front third of your
brain largest in humans than any other
animal by far this is what makes us
human but you have to tell it what you
want so over time you match your
behavior to get what you want so it
starts with that
and then does it fit
i love that idea of telling your brain
what you want especially if i'm talking
to an entrepreneur
they don't know what they want so they
have like a vague idea
but they don't really know the specifics
of what they want and my thing is if you
want to get somewhere if you're really
trying to accomplish something the
amount of hard work of practice of
learning that you're going to have to do
is really pretty extraordinary
but if you're not aiming that at the
right thing then you're never going to
make progress and so everything you're
trying to accomplish in your life has to
be so clear that it boils down to
something that you can do right now
today
do you have a process for people for
that is it as simple as just writing it
down like how do you walk people through
the idea of getting that level of
clarity in their life so i have
virtually all of my patients
start with the one page miracle
on one piece of paper and so as we do
therapy over time it's does it fit
you know does the food you're eating
does the thoughts you have do your
relationships
fit ultimately your purpose and
all
good businesses have plans they have
business plans and they have goals and
they have quarterly priorities and so on
but very few people ever do that
for themselves and when i first did it
in 1986 i think it just helped me so
much clarify because you know amen
clinics and brain md are two companies
um
i didn't even imagine it back then but
it's consistent effort over a long
period of time you end up doing
something special you've written so many
books on the topic given so many talks
and the shows you've done on pbs i mean
it this is a really big topic how do you
help people that feel overwhelmed that
don't know where to start they don't
know how to keep going how do you give
them that entry point
well that's why i write
you know and that's why we have eight
clinics it's
we want to coach them
through it and people go i can't afford
to come to the clinic well get a book
you can get it at the library um there's
so much free things online because our
goal if we're really going to end mental
illness the end of mental illness begins
with a revolution in brain health
talk about this concept if i was an evil
ruler how would i create mental illness
in america we are creating it in america
by the food
we serve by the news that is everywhere
sort of the toxic pit you against me
news cycles social media um letting kids
hit soccer balls with their head having
girl scouts girl scouts selling
poison uh
you're talking about cookies isn't
cookies yeah
and
last year alone nicotine use among
teenagers went up 36 percent
so jewel
is an evil ruler strategy
it's yeah i mean they have bubble gum
flavored
vaping devices that's directed at
children hello
um
[Music]
we need to be more thoughtful talk to me
more about toxins so
definitely obviously tobacco
marijuana um alcohol like those are ones
that i think most people although i love
what you say alcohol is not a health
food it's not uh i think that one may
need to be said more but
there's someone i don't think anybody
thinks smoking is good for them but what
are some of the things that are
problematic that we might not be aware
of like firefighters that was one
because of the flame retardant in the
clothing that i i've only recently heard
people start talking about what are some
toxins that people are getting on a
daily basis that they might not realize
is it well pesticides for example
virtually all the corn
is raised with pesticides virtually all
the soy beans are raised with pesticides
and why don't you want food raised with
pesticides because you ingest the
pesticides and they begin to damage your
microbiome so i don't know if you had a
lot of antibiotics when you were young
but kids who had a lot of antibiotics
when they're young they're anxious
because it's damages their microbiome
what antibiotics kill bugs and so you
have these hundred trillion bugs in your
gut if you're damaging them well
we've seen that goes with anxiety
one of the toxins people don't know
about but clearly in the medical
literature is anesthesia
children who have anesthesia have a
higher incidence of learning
disabilities in abd
and adults who have anesthesia
especially around heart procedures have
a higher incidence of dementia i mean
who thinks about that it's like i need
surgery i'll just get surgery and often
you need to get the surgery but then you
need to rehabilitate
your brain as if you played in the nfl
not for everybody but for some people
mold exposure
so you and i both know dave asprey dave
got scanned about 14 years ago his brain
looked like crap
and he found he was living in a
mold-filled home and
12 years later his brain's much better
because i mean i think he's basically
dedicated his life to creating
brain health and other people
and so if we're going to do a quick
rundown of what those things are that
they would do to heal and rehabilitate
the brain so we talked about some so
hyperbaric oxygen may be extreme but
certainly they can do that get their
diet right
sleep is going to be huge
ending any social social isolation that
you have connecting to people
what are some other don't be fat
that is straight to the point don't be
fat
um i come from fat people
why is it a problem
i it actually of the 11 major risk
factors that steal your mind if you're
overweight you now have five risk
factors
the fat on your body is not your friend
it
stores toxins so that's one risk factor
it increases inflammation
that's another risk factor
i published two studies that show as
your weight goes up the blood flow to
your brain goes down which should scare
the fat off anyone yeah that's three
and
it takes healthy testosterone belly fat
and it flips it
it transforms it into unhealthy cancer
promoting forms
of estrogen
that's four and then being overweight is
five and when you're overweight your
blood sugar often goes up as well and
that's part of being overweight so it's
just
like when i first figured it out i
always carried like 20 extra pounds um i
lost the weight because i'm not going to
shrink my brain right i'm never going to
do anything i know purposefully to hurt
myself why and it's like oh you're too
uptight it's like no it's because i love
myself why would i ever do something to
hurt me unless i was sort of an idiot
and i know that sounds harsh
but
now that you know
we need to be eating in a way that's
calorie
smart and loaded with vegetables there
is a linear correlation to the number of
fruits and vegetables you eat a day and
your level of happiness but the brain
you'll like this
the brain does what you allow it to do
and so whatever habit or whatever
behavior you engage in you're going to
do again
and so
bad habits
they get stuck in your brain just like
good habits get stuck
in your brain so just take some
retraining so for example when i sit
down at a restaurant and they come
always you want alcohol and they just
drop bread on the table so i'm like no
to the alcohol because if you drink
alcohol before a meal you're actually
going to order more food
and you're more likely to order dessert
and no to the bread why because it's a
simple carbohydrate that quickly turns
in your mouth it starts turning to sugar
and it boosts a chemical called
serotonin in your brain which makes you
happy but it drops your frontal lobes
making you more likely to order more and
dessert
and so as soon as the waiter comes i'm
like no on the alcohol take the bread
away and now it's just an automatic
response where the first couple of
months of it it was hard my brain had to
actually make new connections to say
here's the situation say no
yeah
now that
that is what what i call bright lines so
just knowing that in my life i either do
this or i don't do that has been
transformative for me i know a lot of
people struggle with that i think
because they probably make too
aggressive of a bright line in the
beginning
but having rules man i think is is one
thing that people really underutilize
and i know people don't want to um deny
themselves or whatever they feel like
they deserve it that's something that
people that i love very much struggle
with they feel they should be able to
eat whatever they want
and it's not the same
and drew carey said it best he said
eating crappy food isn't a reward
it's a punishment
and i go oh he gets it he gets it but
that is a mind state like i understand
where that statement comes from and i
certainly understand the physiological
effects but eating bad food is [__]
awesome like it feels so good it is
delicious like you said it increases my
serotonin levels i love it like to me i
have to really stop and think about
longevity being important to me um
clarity of mind being important to me
and that's why like clarity clarity
clarity you have got to know what you
want if you don't know what you want in
those moments you're going to say yes to
the things that are right it's going to
be habitual plus when you get rid of
those foods an orange will explode with
flavor
because what you're doing is you're
basically giving in to engineered food
where these food companies have hired
neuroscientists to get the perfect
meltiness crunchiness aroma
and i'm like i'm not giving it's an evil
ruler
strategy and i know what's important
to me i have clarity it's health it's
purpose it's longevity it's my
relationships they don't serve
my goals they hurt my goals and
i just don't want to engage in things
that hurt me i just don't think that's a
rational approach in a society that is
just flipping killing us
what do you think the number one thing
society does that is eroding
health span
right now so i working on a new project
called your brain is always listening
it's about the dragons from the past
that still breathe fire on your
emotional brain and there's a whole list
of bad habit dragons and the one that's
killing us is the oblivious
bad habit dragon we're not reading food
labels we don't know what's in the
products we put on our body we're just
not thinking about
our brains and our bodies
but that's the whole point of the end of
mental illness it's brain
not mind
your brain creates your mind gets your
brain right your mind will be better
where can people
get the book where can they see the
programs all that good stuff so i have a
new program on public television it's my
14th special
it's called change your brain heal your
mind and the end of mental illness will
be out march 3rd
everywhere i hope
nice
last question
in terms of ending mental illness what
is the number one change that people
could make that would have the biggest
impact
so if you want to help other people what
i've learned is you have to do it first
you have to model it you have to be
authentic and then you can be a changed
person and it just starts with that one
question that we talked about
is this good for my brain or bad for it
so if you start loving and caring for
your brain
your mood will be better your focus will
be better your anxiety will be less
nice all right guys the whole tie
between the brain and the mind i think
he's right on the money reframing mental
illness as a problem with an organ that
you have and treating it like you would
treat heart disease i think is a the way
to get rid of the stigma and then b the
way to accurately treat it you will see
that he's got
so much information about exactly how to
do that dive in read the books they've
been transformational for me watch the
specials they're incredible if you want
to digest the information from the books
in that way
i think it's very very effective if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you